=== Derek Parfit, Personal Identity (The Philosophical Review, vol. 80 no. 1, January 1971, pp. 3-27) ===
Full text of the article. Parfit argues that personal identity is not what matters: psychological continuity and connectedness can hold to any degree, can branch (fission), and survival without identity is possible. This is the third position for students working on the am-I-the-same-person issue, after Locke (memory criterion) and Williams (body criterion).

WE CAN, I think, describe cases in which, though we know
the answer to every other question, we have no idea how
to answer a question about personal identity. These cases are
not covered by the criteria of personal identity that we actually
use.
Do they present a problem?
It might be thought that they do not, because they could never
occur. I suspect that some of them could. (Some, for instance,
might become scientifically possible.) But I shall claim that even
if they did they would present no problem.
My targets are two beliefs: one about the nature of personal
identity, the other about its importance.
The first is that in these cases the question about identity must
have an answer.
No one thinks this about, say, nations or machines. Our criteria
for the identity of these do not cover certain cases. No one thinks
that in these cases the questions "Is it the same nation?" or
"Is it the same machine?" must have answers.
Some people believe that in this respect they are different. They
agree that our criteria of personal identity do not cover certain
cases, but they believe that the nature of their own identity
through time is, somehow, such as to guarantee that in these
cases questions about their identity must have answers. This belief
might be expressed as follows: "Whatever happens between now
and any future time, either I shall still exist, or I shall not. Any
future experience will either be my experience, or it will not."
This first belief-in the special nature of personal identity-has,
I think, certain effects. It makes people assume that the principle
of self-interest is more rationally compelling than any moral principle. And it makes them more depressed by the thought of aging
and of death.
1 I have been helped in writing this by D. Wiggins, D. F. Pears, P. F.
Strawson, A. J. Ayer, M. Woods, N. Newman, and (through his publications)
S. Shoemaker.

I cannot see how to disprove this first belief. I shall describe a
problem case. But this can only make it seem implausible.
Another approach might be this. We might suggest that one
cause of the belief is the projection of our emotions. When we imagine ourselves in a problem case, we do feel that the question
"Would it be me ?" must have an answer. But what we take to be
a bafflement about a further fact may be only the bafflement of
our concern.
I shall not pursue this suggestion here. But one cause of our
concern is the belief which is my second target. This is that unless
the question about identity has an answer, we cannot answer
certain important questions (questions about such matters as
survival, memory, and responsibility).
Against this second belief my claim will be this. Certain important questions do presuppose a question about personal identity.
But they can be freed of this presupposition.A nd when they are,
the question about identity has no importance.
I
We can start by consideringt he much-discussedc ase of the man
who, like an amoeba, divides.2
Wiggins has recently dramatized this case.3 He first referred
to the operation imagined by Shoemaker.4 We suppose that my
brain is transplanted into someone else's (brainless) body, and
that the resulting person has my character and apparent memories
2 Implicit in John Locke, Essay ConcerninHg uman Understandinged, . by John
W. Yolton (London, i96i), Vol. II, Ch. XXVII, sec. i8, and discussed by
(among others) A. N. Prior in "Opposite Number," Review of Metaphysics,
II (1957-1958), and "Time, Existence and Identity," Proceedingosf the AristotelianS ociety,L VII (1965-1966); J. Bennett in "The Simplicity of the Soul,"
journal of PhilosophyL, XIV (1967); and R. Chisholm and S. Shoemaker in
"The Loose and Popular and the Strict and the Philosophical Senses of
Identity," in Perception and Personal Identity: Proceedings of the 1967 Oberlin
Colloquiumin Philosophye,d . by Norman Care and Robert H.Grimm (Cleveland,
1967) .
3 In Identitya nd Spatio-7TemporCaol ntinuity(O xford, 1967), p. 50.
4 In Self-Knowledgae nd Self-Identity( Ithaca, N. Y., 1963), p. 22.

of my life. Most of us would agree, after thought, that the resulting
person is me. I shall here assume such agreement.5
Wiggins then imagined his own operation. My brain is divided,
and each half is housed in a new body. Both resulting people have
my character and apparent memories of my life.
What happens to me? There seem only three possibilities: (i)
I do not survive; (2) I survive as one of the two people; (3) I
survive as both.
The trouble with (i) is this. We agreed that I could survive if
my brain were successfully transplanted. And people have in fact
survived with half their brains destroyed. It seems to follow that
I could survive if half my brain were successfully transplanted and
the other half were destroyed. But if this is so, how could I not
survive if the other half were also successfully transplanted? How
could a double success be a failure?
We can move to the second description. Perhaps one success is
the maximum score. Perhaps I shall be one of the resulting people.
The trouble here is that in Wiggins' case each half of my brain is
exactly similar, and so, to start with, is each resulting person. So
how can I survive as only one of the two people? What can make
me one of them rather than the other?
It seems clear that both of these descriptions-that I do not
survive, and that I survive as one of the people-are highly
implausible. Those who have accepted them must have assumed
that they were the only possible descriptions.
What about our third description: that I survive as both people ?
It might be said, "If 'survive' implies identity, this description
makes no sense-you cannot be two people. If it does not, the
description is irrelevant to a problem about identity."
I shall later deny the second of these remarks. But there are
ways of denying the first. We might say, "What we have called
'the two resulting people' are not two people. They are one person.
5 Those who would disagree are not making a mistake. For them my argument would need a different case. There must be some multiple transplant,
faced with which these people would both find it hard to believe that there must
be an answer to the question about personal identity, and be able to be shown
that nothing of importance turns upon this question.

I do survive Wiggins' operation. Its effect is to give me two bodies
and a divided mind."
It would shorten my argument if this were absurd. But I
do not think it is. It is worth showing why.
We can, I suggest, imagine a divided mind. We can imagine a
man having two simultaneous experiences, in having each of
which he is unaware of having the other.
We may not even need to imagine this. Certain actual cases,
to which Wiggins referred, seem to be best described in these
terms. These involve the cutting of the bridge between the
hemispheres of the brain. The aim was to cure epilepsy. But the
result appears to be, in the surgeon's words, the creation of
"two separate spheres of consciousness," each of which controls
one half of the patient's body. What is experienced in each is,
presumably, experienced by the patient.
There are certain complications in these actual cases. So let us
imagine a simpler case.
Suppose that the bridge between my hemispheres is brought
under my voluntary control. This would enable me to disconnect
my hemispheres as easily as if I were blinking. By doing this I
would divide my mind. And we can suppose that when my mind
is divided I can, in each half, bring about reunion.
This ability would have obvious uses. To give an example: I am
near the end of a maths exam, and see two ways of tackling the
last problem. I decide to divide my mind, to work, with each half,
at one of two calculations, and then to reunite my mind and write
a fair copy of the best result.
What shall I experience?
When I disconnect my hemispheres, my consciousness divides
into two streams. But this division is not something that I experience. Each of my two streams of consciousness seems to have been
straightforwardly continuous with my one stream of consciousness up to the moment of division. The only changes in each stream
are the disappearance of half my visual field and the loss of sensation in, and control over, half my body.
6 R. W. Sperry, in Brain and ConscibusE xperiencee, d. by J. C. Eccles (New
York, 19 66), p. 299.

Consider my experiences in what we can call my "right-handed"
stream. I remember that I assigned my right hand to the longer
calculation. This I now begin. In working at this calculation
I can see, from the movements of my left hand, that I am also
working at the other. But I am not aware of working at the
other. So I might, in my right-handed stream, wonder how,
in my left-handed stream, I am getting on.
My work is now over. I am about to reunite my mind. What
should I, in each stream, expect? Simply that I shall suddenly
seem to remember just having thought out two calculations, in
thinking out each of which I was not aware of thinking out the
other. This, I submit, we can imagine. And if my mind was divided,
these memories are correct.
In describing this episode, I assumed that there were two series
of thoughts, and that they were both mine. If my two hands
visibly wrote out two calculations, and if I claimed to remember
two corresponding series of thoughts, this is surely what we
should want to say.
If it is, then a person's mental history need not be like a canal,
with only one channel. It could be like a river, with islands, and
with separate streams.
To apply this to Wiggins' operation: we mentioned the view
that it gives me two bodies and a divided mind. We cannot now
call this absurd. But it is, I think, unsatisfactory.
There were two features of the case of the exam that made us
want to say that only one person was involved. The mind was soon
reunited, and there was only one body. If a mind was permanently
divided and its halves developed in different ways, the point of
speaking of one person would start to disappear. Wiggins'case,
where there are also two bodies, seems to be over the borderline.
After I have had his operation, the two "products" each have all
the attributes of a person. They could live at opposite ends of
the earth. (If they later met, they might even fail to recognize
each other.) It would become intolerable to deny that they were
different people.
Suppose we admit that they are different people. Could we still
claim that I survived as both, using "survive" to imply identity?
We could. For we might suggest that two people could compose

a third. We might say, "I do survive Wiggins' operation as two
people. They can be different people, and yet be me, in just the
way in which the Pope's three crowns are one crown."7
This is a possible way of giving sense to the claim that I survive
as two different people, using "survive" to imply identity. But
it keeps the language of identity only by changing the concept
of a person. And there are obvious objections to this change.8
The alternative, for which I shall argue, is to give up the language of identity. We can suggest that I survive as two different
people without implying that I am these people.
When I first mentioned this alternative, I mentioned this objection: "If your new way of talking does not imply identity, it
cannot solve our problem. For that is about identity. The problem
is that all the possible answers to the question about identity are
highly implausible."
We can now answer this objection.
We can start by reminding ourselves that this is an objection
only if we have one or both of the beliefs which I mentioned at
the start of this paper.
The first was the belief that to any question about personal identity, in any describable case, there must be a true answer. For
those with this belief, Wiggins' case is doubly perplexing. If all
the possible answers are implausible, it is hard to decide which of
them is true, and hard even to keep the belief that one of them
must be true. If we give up this belief, as I think we should, these
problems disappear. We shall then regard the case as like many
others in which, for quite unpuzzling reasons, there is no answer
to a question about identity. (Consider "Was England the same
nation after io66 ?")
Wiggins' case makes the first belief implausible. It also makes
7Cf. David Wiggins, op. Cit, p. 40.
8 Suppose the resulting people fight a duel. Are there three people fighting,
one on each side, and one on both? And suppose one of the bullets kills. Are
there two acts, one murder and one suicide? How many people are left alive?
One? Two? (We could hardly say, "One and a half.") We could talk in this
way. But instead of saying that the resulting people aret he original person-so
that the pair is a trio-it would be far simpler to treat them as a pair, and
describe their relation to the original person in some new way. (I owe this
suggested way of talking, and the objections to it, to Michael Woods.)

it trivial. For it undermines the second belief. This was the belief
that important questions turn upon the question about identity.
(It is worth pointing out that those who have only this second
belief do not think that there must be an answer to this question,
but rather that we must decide upon an answer.)
Against this second belief my claim is this. Certain questions
do presuppose a question about personal identity. And because
these questions arei mportant, Wiggins' case does present a problem.
But we cannot solve this problem by answering the question about
identity. We can solve this problem only by taking these important
questions and prizing them apart from the question about identity.
After we have done this, the question about identity (though
we might for the sake of neatness decide it) has no further interest.
Because there are several questions which presuppose identity,
this claim will take some time to fill out.
We can first return to the question of survival. This is a special
case, for survival does not so much presuppose the retaining of
identity as seem equivalent to it. It is thus the general relation
which we need to prize apart from identity. We can then consider
particular relations, such as those involved in memory and intention.
"Will I survive?" seems, I said, equivalent to "Will there be
some person alive who is the same person as me?"
If we treat these questions as equivalent, then the least
unsatisfactory description of Wiggins' case is, I think, that I
survive with two bodies and a divided mind.
Several writers have chosen to say that I am neither of the
resulting people. Given our equivalence, this implies that I do not
survive, and hence, presumably, that even if Wiggins' operation
is not literally death, I ought, since I will not survive it, to regard
it as death. But this seemed absurd.
It is worth repeating why. An emotion or attitude can be
criticized for resting on a false belief, or for being inconsistent.
A man who regarded Wiggins' operation as death must, I suggest,
be open to one of these criticisms.
He might believe that his relation to each of the resulting
people fails to contain some element which is contained in survival.
But how can this be true? We agreed that he would survive if he

stood in this very same relation to only one of the resulting people.
So it cannot be the nature of this relation which makes it fail, in
Wiggins' case, to be survival. It can only be its duplication.
Suppose that our man accepts this, but still regards division as
death. His reaction would now seem wildly inconsistent. He would
be like a man who, when told of a drug that could double his years
of life, regarded the taking of this drug as death. The only difference in the case of division is that the extra years are to run concurrently. This is an interesting difference. But it cannot mean
that there are no years to run.
I have argued this for those who think that there must, in Wiggins' case, be a true answer to the question about identity. For
them, we might add, "Perhaps the original person does lose his
identity. But there may be other ways to do this than to die. One
other way might be to multiply. To regard these as the same is
to confuse nought with two."
For those who think that the question of identity is up for
decision, it would be clearly absurd to regard Wiggins' operation
as death. These people would have to think, "We could have
chosen to say that I should be one of the resulting people. If
we had, I should not have regarded it as death. But since we have
chosen to say that I am neither person, I do." This is hard even to
understand.9
My first conclusion, then, is this. The relation of the original
person to each of the resulting people contains all that interests
us-all that matters-in any ordinary case of survival. This is
why we need a sense in which one person can survive as two.10
One of my aims in the rest of this paper will be to suggest such
a sense. But we can first make some general remarks.
II
Identity is a one-one relation. Wiggins' case serves to show that
what matters in survival need not be one-one.
9 Cf. Sydney Shoemaker, in Perception and Personal Identity:P roceedingosf the
1967 OberlinC olloquimin Philosophyl,o c. cit.
10 Cf. David Wiggins, op. cit., p. 54.
I0

Wiggins' case is of course unlikely to occur. The relations which
matter are, in fact, one-one. It is because they are that we can
imply the holding of these relations by using the language of
identity.
This use of language is convenient. But it can lead us astray.
We may assume that what matters is identity and, hence, has the
properties of identity.
In the case of the property of being one-one, this mistake is not
serious. For what matters is in fact one-one. But in the case of
another property, the mistake is serious. Identity is all-or-nothing.
Most of the relations which matter in survival are, in fact, relations
of degree. If we ignore this, we shall be led into quite ill-grounded
attitudes and beliefs.
The claim that I have just made-that most of what matters are
relations of degree- I have yet to support. Wiggins' case shows
only that these relations need not be one-one. The merit of the
case is not that it shows this in particular, but that it makes the
first break between what matters and identity. The belief that
identity is what matters is hard to overcome. This is shown in
most discussions of the problem cases which actually occur:
cases, say, of amnesia or of brain damage. Once Wiggins' case
has made one breach in this belief, the rest should be easier to
remove.
To turn to a recent debate: most of the relations which matter
can be provisionally referred to under the heading "psychological
continuity" (which includes causal continuity). My claim is thus
that we use the language of personal identity in order to imply
11 Bernard Williams' "The Self and the Future," PhilosophicalR eview,
LXXIX (1970), i6i-i8o, is relevant here. He asks the question "Shall I
survive?" in a range of problem cases, and he shows how natural it is to believe
(i) that this question must have an answer, (2) that the answer must be allor-nothing, and (3) that there is a "risk" of our reaching the wronga nswer.
Because these beliefs are so natural, we should need in undermining them to
discuss their causes. These, I think, can be found in the ways in which we
misinterpret what it is to remember (cf. Sec. III below) and to anticipate
(cf. Williams' "Imagination and the Self," Proceedings of the British Academy,
LII [1966], 105-124); and also in the way in which certain features of our
egoistic concern-e.g., that it is simple, and applies to all imaginable casesare "projected" onto its object. (For another relevant discussion, see Terence
Penelhum's Survivala nd DisembodiedE xistence[ London, 1970], final chapters.)
I I

such continuity. This is close to the view that psychological
continuity provides a criterion of identity.
Williams has attacked this view with the following argument.
Identity is a one-one relation. So any criterion of identity must
appeal to a relation which is logically one-one. Psychological continuity is not logically one-one. So it cannot provide a criterion.12
Some writers have replied that it is enough if the relation
appealed to is always in fact one-one.13
I suggest a slightly different reply. Psychological continuity is
a ground for speaking of identity when it is one-one.
If psychological continuity took a one-many or branching form,
we should need, I have argued, to abandon the language of
identity. So this possibility would not count against this view.
We can make a stronger claim. This possibility would count in
its favor.
The view might be defended as follows. Judgments of personal
identity have great importance. What gives them their importance
is the fact that they imply psychological continuity. This is why,
whenever there is such continuity, we ought, if we can, to imply it
by making a judgment of identity.
If psychological continuity took a branching form, no coherent
set ofjudgments of identity could correspond to, and thus be used
to imply, the branching form of this relation. But what we ought
to do, in such a case, is take the importance which would attach
to a judgment of identity and attach this importance directly to
each limb of the branching relation. So this case helps to show
that judgments of personal identity do derive their importance
from the fact that they imply psychological continuity. It helps to
show that when we can, usefully, speak of identity, this relation is
our ground.
This argument appeals to a principle which Williams put
forward.14 The principle is that an important judgment should
be asserted and denied only on importantly different grounds.
12 "Personal Identity and Individuation," Proceedings of the Aristotelian
SocietyL, VII (1956-1957), 229-253; also Analysis,2 i (1960-1961), 43-48.
13J. M. Shorter, "More about Bodily Continuity and Personal Identity,"
Analysis,2 2 (i96i-1962), 79-85; and Mrs. J. M. R. Jack (unpublished), who
requires that this truth be embedded in a causal theory.
14 Analysis,2 1 (1960-i96i), 44.

Williams applied this principle to a case in which one man is
psychologically continuous with the dead Guy Fawkes, and a case
in which two men are. His argument was this. If we treat psychological continuity as a sufficient ground for speaking of identity,
we shall say that the one man is Guy Fawkes. But we could not
say that the two men are, although we should have the same
ground. This disobeys the principle. The remedy is to deny that
the one man is Guy Fawkes, to insist that sameness of the body
is necessary for identity.
Williams' principle can yield a different answer. Suppose we
regard psychological continuity as more important than sameness
of the body.'5 And suppose that the one man really is psychologically (and causally) continuous with Guy Fawkes. If he is, it would
disobey the principle to deny that he is Guy Fawkes, for we have
the same important ground as in a normal case of identity. In
the case of the two men, we again have the same important ground.
So we ought to take the importance from the judgment of identity
and attach it directly to this ground. We ought to say, as in Wiggins' case, that each limb of the branching relation is as good as
survival. This obeys the principle.
To sum up these remarks: even if psychological continuity is
neither logically, nor always in fact, one-one, it can provide a
criterion of identity. For this can appeal to the relation of
non-branchingp sychological continuity, which is logically one-one.16
r
The criterion might be sketched as follows. "X and are the
same person if they are psychologically continuous and there is
no person who is contemporary with either and psychologically
continuous with the other." We should need to explain what we
mean by "psychologically continuous" and say how much continuity the criterion requires. We should then, I think, have described a sufficient condition for speaking of identity.17
We need to say something more. If we admit that psychological
15 For the reasons given by A. M. Quinton in "The Soul," Journal of Philosophy, LIX (1962), 393-409.
16 Cf. S. Shoemaker, "Persons and Their Pasts," to appear in the American
PhilosophicaQl uarterlya,n d "Wiggins on Identity," PhilosophicaRl eview,L XXIX
(1970), 542.
17 But not a necessary condition, for in the absence of psychological continuity bodily identity might be sufficient.
I3

continuity might not be one-one, we need to say what we ought
to do if it were not one-one. Otherwise our account would be open
to the objections that it is incomplete and arbitrary.18
I have suggested that if psychological continuity took a branching form, we ought to speak in a new way, regarding what we
describe as having the same significance as identity. This answers
these objections.19
We can now return to our discussion. We have three remaining
aims. One is to suggest a sense of "survive" which does not imply
identity. Another is to show that most of what matters in survival
are relations of degree. A third is to show that none of these
relations needs to be described in a way that presupposes identity.
We can take these aims in the reverse order.
III
The most important particular relation is that involved in
memory. This is because it is so easy to believe that its description
must refer to identity.20 This belief about memory is an important
cause of the view that personal identity has a special nature.
But it has been well discussed by Shoemaker2l and by Wiggins22
So we can be brief.
It may be a logical truth that we can only remember our own
experiences. But we can frame a new concept for which this is not
a logical truth. Let us call this "q-memory."
18 Cf. Bernard Williams, "Personal Identity and Individuation," Proceedings
of the AristotelianS ociety,L VII (1956-1957), 240-24I, and Analysis, 2 I (19 60-
1961), 44; and also Wiggins, op. cit., p. 38: " if coincidence under [the concept]
f is to be genuinelys ufficient we must not withhold identity ... simply because
transitivity is threatened."
19 Williams produced another objection to the "psychological criterion,"
that it makes it hard to explain the difference between the concepts of identity
and exact similarity (Analysis, 2I [1960-i96I], 48). But if we include the
requirement of causal continuity we avoid this objection (and one of those
produced by Wiggins in his note 47).
20 Those philosophers who have held this belief, from Butler onward, are
too numerous to cite.
21 Op.c it.
22 In a paper on Butler's objection to Locke (not yet published).
I4

To sketch a definition23 I am q-remembering an experience if (i)
I have a belief about a past experience which seems in itself like
a memory belief, (2) someone did have such an experience, and (3)
my belief is dependent upon this experience in the same way
(whatever that is) in which a memory of an experience is dependent upon it.
According to (i) q-memories seem like memories. So I q-remember having experiences.
This may seem to make q-memory presuppose identity. One
might say, "My apparent memory of having an experience is an
apparent memory of my having an experience. So how could I
q-remember my having other people's experiences?"
This objection rests on a mistake. When I seem to remember an
experience, I do indeed seem to remember having it.24 But it
cannot be a part of what I seem to remember about this experience
that I, the person who now seems to remember it, am the person
who had this experience. That I am is something that I automatically assume. (My apparent memories sometimes come to
me simply as the belief that I had a certain experience.) But it
is something that I am justified in assuming only because I do not
in fact have q-memories of other people's experiences.
Suppose that I did start to have such q-memories. If I did, I
should cease to assume that my apparent memories must be
about my own experiences. I should come to assess an apparent
memory by asking two questions: (i) Does it tell me about a past
experience? (2) If so, whose?
Moreover (and this is a crucial point) my apparent memories
would now come to me as q-memories. Consider those of my ap-
23 J here follow Shoemaker's "quasi-memory." Cf. also Penelhum's "retrocognition," in his article on "Personal Identity," in the Encyclopedioaf Philosophy,e d. by Paul Edwards.
24 As Shoemaker put it, I seem to remember the experience "from the
inside" (op. cit.).
25 This is what so many writers have overlooked. Cf. Thomas Reid: "My
memory testifies not only that this was done, but that it was done by me who
now remember it" ("Of Identity," in Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man,
ed. by A. D. Woozley [London, I94I], p. 203). This mistake is discussed by
A. B. Palma in "Memory and Personal Identity," AustralasianJ ournal of
Philosophy4,2 (1964), 57.
I5

parent memories which do come to me simply as beliefs about my
past: for example, "I did that." If I knew that I could q-remember
other people's experiences, these beliefs would come to me in a
more guarded form: for example, "Someone-probably I-did
that." I might have to work out who it was.
I have suggested that the concept of q-memory is coherent.
Wiggins' case provides an illustration. The resulting people, in
his case, both have apparent memories of living the life of the
original person. If they agree that they are not this person, they
will have to regard these as only q-memories. And when they are
asked a question like "Have you heard this music before?" they
might have to answer "I am sure that I q-remember hearing it.
But I am not sure whether I remember hearing it. I am not sure
whether it was I who heard it, or the original person."
We can next point out that on our definition every memory is
also a q-memory. Memories are, simply, q-memories of one's own
experiences. Since this is so, we could afford now to drop the
concept of memory and use in its place the wider concept
q-memory. If we did, we should describe the relation between
an experience and what we now call a "memory" of this
experience in a way which does not presuppose that they are
had by the same person 26
This way of describing this relation has certain merits. It
vindicates the "memory criterion" of personal identity against
the charge of circularity.27 And it might, I think, help with the
problem of other minds.
26 It is not logically necessary that we only q-remember our own experiences.
But it might be necessary on other grounds. This possibility is intriguingly
explored by Shoemaker in his "Persons and Their Pasts" (op. cit.). He shows
that q-memories can provide a knowledge of the world only if the observations
which are q-remembered trace out fairly continuous spatiotemporal paths.
If the observationsw hich are q-rememberedt raced out a network of frequently
interlocking paths, they could not, I think, be usefully ascribed to persisting
observers, but would have to be referred to in some more complex way. But in
fact the observations which are q-remembered trace out single and separate
paths; so we can ascribe them to ourselves. In other words, it is epistemologically necessary that the observations which are q-remembered should satisfy
a certain general condition, one particular form of which allows them to be
usefully self-ascribed.
27 Cf. Wiggins' paper on Butler's objection to Locke.
i6

But we must move on. We can next take the relation between an
intention and a later action. It may be a logical truth that we can
intend to perform only our own actions. But intentions can be
redescribed as q-intentions. And one person could q-intend to
perform another person's actions.
Wiggins' case again provides the illustration. We are supposing
that neither of the resulting people is the original person. If so,
we shall have to agree that the original person can, before the
operation, q-intend to perform their actions. He might, for example, q-intend, as one of them, to continue his present career, and,
as the other, to try something new.28 (I say "q-intend as one of
them" because the phrase "q-intend that one of them" would not
convey the directness of the relation which is involved. If I intend
that someone else should do something, I cannot get him to do it
simply by forming this intention. But if I am the original person,
and he is one of the resulting people, I can.)
The phrase "q-intend as one of them" reminds us that we need
a sense in which one person can survive as two. But we can first
point out that the concepts of q-memory and q-intention give
us our model for the others that we need: thus, a man who can
q-remember could q-recognize, and be a q-witness of, what he has
never seen; and a man who can q-intend could have q-ambitions,
make q-promises, and be q-responsible for.
To put this claim in general terms: many different relations are
included within, or are a consequence of, psychological continuity.
We describe these relations in ways which presuppose the continued existence of one person. But we could describe them in new
ways which do not.
This suggests a bolder claim. It might be possible to think of
experiences in a wholly "impersonal" way. I shall not develop
28 There are complications here. He could form divergenqt -intentions only if
he could distinguish, in advance, between the resulting people (e.g., as "the
left-hander" and "the right-hander"). And he could be confident that such
divergent q-intentions would be carried out only if he had reason to believe that
neither of the resulting people would change their (inherited) mind. Suppose
he was torn between duty and desire. He could not solve this dilemma by qintending, as one of the resulting people, to do his duty, and, as the other, to do
what he desires. For the one he q-intended to do his duty would face the same
dilemma.
I7

this claim here. What I shall try to describe is a way of thinking
of our own identity through time which is more flexible, and less
misleading, than the way in which we now think.
This way of thinking will allow for a sense in which one person
can survive as two. A more important feature is that it treats
survival as a matter of degree.
IV
We must first show the need for this second feature. I shall
use two imaginary examples.
The first is the converse of Wiggins' case: fusion. Just as division
serves to show that what matters in survival need not be one-one,
so fusion serves to show that it can be a question of degree.
Physically, fusion is easy to describe. Two people come together.
While they are unconscious, their two bodies grow into one. One
person then wakes up.
The psychology of fusion is more complex. One detail we have
already dealt with in the case of the exam. When my mind was
reunited, I remembered just having thought out two calculations.
The one person who results from a fusion can, similarly, q-remember living the lives of the two original people. None of their qmemories need be lost.
But some things must be lost. For any two people who fuse
together will have different characteristics, different desires, and
different intentions. How can these be combined?
We might suggest the following. Some of these will be compatible. These can coexist in the one resulting person. Some will be
incompatible. These, if of equal strength, can cancel out, and if
of different strengths, the stronger can be made weaker. And all
these effects might be predictable.
To give examples-first, of compatibility: I like Palladio and
intend to visit Venice. I am about to fuse with a person who likes
Giotto and intends to visit Padua. I can know that the one person
we shall become will have both tastes and both intentions. Second,
of incompatibility: I hate red hair, and always vote Labour. The
other person loves red hair, and always votes Conservative. I can
I8

know that the one person we shall become will be indifferent to
red hair, and a floating voter.
If we were about to undergo a fusion of this kind, would we
regard it as death?
Some of us might. This is less absurd than regarding division
as death. For after my division the two resulting people will be
in every way like me, while after my fusion the one resulting
person will not be wholly similar. This makes it easier to say, when
faced with fusion, "I shall not survive," thus continuing to regard
survival as a matter of all-or-nothing.
This reaction is less absurd. But here are two analogies which
tell against it.
First, fusion would involve the changing of some of our characteristics and some of our desires. But only the very self-satisfied
would think of this as death. Many people welcome treatments
with these effects.
Second, someone who is about to fuse can have, beforehand,
just as much "intentional control" over the actions of the resulting
individual as someone who is about to marry can have, beforehand,
over the actions of the resulting couple. And the choice of a
partner for fusion can be just as well considered as the choice of
a marriage partner. The two original people can make sure (perhaps by "trial fusion") that they do have compatible characters,
desires, and intentions.
I have suggested that fusion, while not clearly survival, is not
clearly failure to survive, and hence that what matters in survival
can have degrees.
To reinforce this claim we can now turn to a second example.
This is provided by certain imaginary beings. These beings are
just like ourselves except that they reproduce by a process of
natural division.
We can illustrate the histories of these imagined beings with
the aid of a diagram. (This is given on the next page.) The lines
on the diagram represent the spatiotemporal paths which would
be traced out by the bodies of these beings. We can call each
single line (like the double line) a "branch"; and we can call the
whole structure a "tree." And let us suppose that each "branch"
corresponds to what is thought of as the life of one individual.
'9

4 Space-_
B+15 B+30
8+7 8~~~~~~~~+14
t (later)
+ B+2+ 2
Time
FA 4 earlier
These individuals are referred to as "A," "B+I," and so forth.
Now, each single division is an instance of Wiggins' case. So
A's relation to both B + i and B + 2 is just as good as survival.
But what of A's relation to B+30?
I said earlier that what matters in survival could be provisionally referred to as "psychological continuity." I must now distinguish this relation from another, which I shall call "psychological connectedness."
Let us say that the relation between a q-memory and the experience q-remembered is a "direct" relation. Another "direct"
relation is that which holds between a q-intention and the qintended action. A third is that which holds between different
expressions of some lasting q-characteristic.
"Psychological connectedness," as I define it, requires the holding of these direct psychological relations. "Connectedness"
is not transitive, since these relations are not transitive. Thus, if
r
X q-remembers most of r's life, and q-remembers most of Z's
life, it does not follow that X q-remembers most of Z's life. And if
r
X carries out the q-intentions of Y. and carries out the q-intentions of Z, it does not follow that X carries out the q-intentions of
Z.
"Psychological continuity," in contrast, only requires overlapping chains of direct psychological relations. So "continuity" is
transitive.
To return to our diagram. A is psychologically continuous with
B + 30. There are between the two continuous chains of overlap-

ping relations. Thus, A has q-intentional control over B + 2,
B + 2 has q-intentional control over B + 6, and so on up to B +
30. Or B + 30 can q-remember the life of B + I4, B + I4 can
q-remember the life of B + 6, and so on back to A.29
A, however, need not be psychologically connected to B + 30.
Connectedness requires direct relations. And if these beings are
like us, A cannot stand in such relations to every individual
in his indefinitely long "tree." Q-memories will weaken with the
passage of time, and then fade away. Q-ambitions, once fulfilled,
will be replaced by others. Q-characteristics will gradually change.
In general, A stands in fewer and fewer direct psychological
relations to an individual in his "tree" the more remote that
individual is. And if the individual is (like B + 30) sufficiently
remote, there may be between the two no direct psychological
relations.
Now that we have distinguished the general relations of psychological continuity and psychological connectedness, I suggest that
connectedness is a more important element in survival. As a claim
about our own survival, this would need more arguments than
I have space to give. But it seems clearly true for my imagined
beings. A is as close psychologically to B + i as I today am to
myself tomorrow. A is as distant from B + 30 as I am from my
great-great-grandson.
Even if connectedness is not more important than continuity,
the fact that one of these is a relation of degree is enough to show
that what matters in survival can have degrees. And in any case
the two relations are quite different. So our imagined beings
would need a way of thinking in which this difference is recognized.
V
What I propose is this.
First, A can think of any individual, anywhere in his "tree,"
as "a descendant self." This phrase implies psychological continuity. Similarly, any later individual can think of any earlier
29 The chain of continuity must run in one direction of time. B + 2 is not, in
the sense I intend, psychologically continuous with B + I.

individual on the single path30 which connects him to A as "an
ancestral self."
Since psychological continuity is transitive, "being an ancestral
self of" and "being a descendant self of" are also transitive.
To imply psychological connectedness I suggest the phrases
"one of my future selves" and "one of my past selves."
These are the phrases with which we can describe Wiggins' case.
For having past and future selves is, what we needed, a way of
continuing to exist which does not imply identity through time.
The original person does, in this sense, survive Wiggins' operation:
the two resulting people are his later selves. And they can each
refer to him as "my past self." (They can share a past self without
being the same self as each other.)
Since psychological connectedness is not transitive, and is a
matter of degree, the relations "being a past self of" and "being a
future self of" should themselves be treated as relations of degree.
We allow for this series of descriptions: "my most recent self,"
"one of my earlier selves," "one of my distant selves," "hardly
one of my past selves (I can only q-remember a few of his experiences)," and, finally, "not in any way one of my past selvesjust an ancestral self."
This way of thinking would clearly suit our first imagined
beings. But let us now turn to a second kind of being. These
reproduce by fusion as well as by division.31 And let us suppose
that they fuse every autumn and divide every spring. This yields
the following diagram:
-Space-*
/ /+lr spring
Time ) /p autumn
A spring
autumn
30 Cf. David Wiggins, op.cit.
31 Cf. Sydney Shoemaker in "Persons and Their Pasts," op.cit.

If A is the individual whose life is represented by the threelined "branch," the two-lined "tree" representst hose lives which
are psychologically continuous with A's life. (It can be seen that
each individual has his own "tree," which overlaps with many
others.)
For the imagined beings in this second world, the phrases "an
ancestral self" and "a descendant self" would cover too much to
be of much use. (There may well be pairs of dates such that every
individual who ever lived before the first date was an ancestral
self of every individual who ever will live after the second date.)
Conversely, since the lives of each individual last for only half a
year, the word "I" would cover too little to do all of the work
which it does for us. So part of this work would have to be done,
for these second beings, by talk about past and future selves.
We can now point out a theoretical flaw in our proposed way
of thinking. The phrase "a past self of" implies psychological
connectedness.B eing a past self of is treated as a relation of degree,
so that this phrase can be used to imply the varying degrees of
psychological connectedness. But this phrase can imply only the
degrees of connectedness between different lives. It cannot be
used within a single life. And our way of delimiting successive
lives does not refer to the degrees of psychological connectedness.
Hence there is no guarantee that this phrase, "a past self of,"
could be used whenever it was needed. There is no guarantee
that psychological connectedness will not vary in degree within a
single life.
This flaw would not concern our imagined beings. For they
divide and unite so frequently, and their lives are in consequence
so short, that within a single life psychological connectedness
would always stand at a maximum.
But let us look, finally, at a third kind of being.
In this world there is neither division nor union. There are a
number of everlasting bodies, which gradually change in appearance. And direct psychological relations, as before, hold only
over limited periods of time. This can be illustrated with a third
diagram (given on the next page). In this diagram the two
shadings represent the degrees of psychological connectedness to
their two central points.

4- Spacet
Time
These beings could not use the way of thinking that we have
proposed. Since there is no branching of psychological continuity,
they would have to regard themselves as immortal. It might be
said that this is what they are. But there is, I suggest, a better
description.
Our beings would have one reason for thinking of themselves
as immortal. The parts of each "line" are all psychologically
continuous. But the parts of each "line" are not all psychologically
connected. Direct psychological relations hold only between
those parts which are close to each other in time. This gives our
beings a reason for not thinking of each "line" as corresponding
to one single life. For if they did, they would have no way of
implying these direct relations. When a speaker says, for example,
"I spent a period doing such and such," his hearers would not
be entitled to assume that the speaker has any memories of this
period, that his character then and now are in any way similar,
that he is now carrying out any of the plans or intentions which
he then had, and so forth. Because the word "I" would carry none
of these implications, it would not have for these "immortal"
beings the usefulness which it has for us.32
To gain a better way of thinking, we must revise the way of
thinking that we proposed above. The revision is this. The distinction between successive selves can be made by reference, not
to the branching of psychological continuity, but to the degrees
82 Cf. Austin Duncan Jones, "Man's Mortality," Analysis,2 8 (1967-1968),
65-70.

of psychological connectedness. Since this connectedness is a
matter of degree, the drawing of these distinctions can be left to
the choice of the speaker and be allowed to vary from context to
context.
On this way of thinking, the word "I" can be used to imply the
greatest degree of psychological connectedness. When the connections are reduced, when there has been any marked change of
character or style of life, or any marked loss of memory, our imagined beings would say, "It was not I who did that, but an earlier
self." They could then describe in what ways, and to what degree,
they are related to this earlier self.
This revised way of thinking would suit not only our "immortal"
beings. It is also the way in which we ourselves could think about
our lives. And it is, I suggest, surprisingly natural.
One of its features, the distinction between successive selves,
has already been used by several writers. To give an example,
from Proust: "we are incapable, while we are in love, of acting
as fit predecessors of the next persons who, when we are in love no
longer, we shall presently have become. . ..
Although Proust distinguished between successive selves, he
still thought of one person as being these different selves. This
we would not do on the way of thinking that I propose. If I say,
"It will not be me, but one of my future selves," I do not imply
that I will be that future self. He is one of my later selves, and I am
one of his earlier selves. There is no underlying person who we
both are.
To point out another feature of this way of thinking. When I say,
"There is no person who we both are," I am only giving my
decision. Another person could say, "It will be you," thus deciding
differently. There is no question of either of these decisions being
a mistake. Whether to say "I," or "one of my future selves," or
"a descendant self" is entirely a matter of choice. The matter of
fact, which must be agreed, is only whether the disjunction applies.
r
(The question "Are X and the same person?" thus becomes
"Is X at least an ancestral [or descendant] self of r?")
33 Withina BuddingG rove( London, 1949), I, 226 (my own translation).

VI
I have tried to show that what matters in the continued existence
of a person are, for the most part, relations of degree. And I have
proposed a way of thinking in which this would be recognized.
I shall end by suggesting two consequences and asking one
question.
It is sometimes thought to be especially rational to act in our
own best interests. But I suggest that the principle of self-interest
has no force. There are only two genuine competitors in this
particular field. One is the principle of biased rationality: do
what will best achieve what you actually want. The other is the
principle of impartiality: do what is in the best interests of everyone concerned.
The apparent force of the principle of self-interest derives, I
think, from these two other principles.
The principle of self-interest is normally supported by the
principle of biased rationality. This is because most people care
about their own future interests.
Suppose that this prop is lacking. Suppose that a man does not
care what happens to him in, say, the more distant future. To
such a man, the principle of self-interest can only be propped up
by an appeal to the principle of impartiality. We must say, "Even
if you don't care, you ought to take what happens to you then
equally into account." But for this, as a special claim, there seem
to me no good arguments. It can only be supported as part of the
general claim, "You ought to take what happens to everyone
equally into account."34
The special claim tells a man to grant an equal weight to all
the parts of his future. The argument for this can only be that
all the parts of his future are equally parts of his future. This is
true. But it is a truth too superficial to bear the weight of the
argument. (To give an analogy: The unity of a nation is, in its
nature, a matter of degree. It is therefore only a superficial truth
34Cf. Thomas Nagel's The Possibility of Altruism (Oxford, 1970), in which the
special claim is in effect defended as part of the general claim.

that all of a man's compatriots are equally his compatriots. This
truth cannot support a good argument for nationalism.)35
I have suggested that the principle of self-interest has no strength
of its own. If this is so, there is no special problem in the fact that
what we ought to do can be against our interests. There is only
the general problem that it may not be what we want to do.
The second consequence which I shall mention is implied in the
first. Egoism, the fear not of near but of distant death, the regret
that so much of one's only life should have gone by-these are not,
I think, wholly natural or instinctive. They are all strengthened
by the beliefs about personal identity which I have been attacking.
If we give up these beliefs, they should be weakened.
My final question is this. These emotions are bad, and if we
weaken them we gain. But can we achieve this gain without, say,
also weakening loyalty to, or love of, other particular selves? As
Hume warned, the "refined reflections which philosophy suggests
.. . cannot diminish ... our vicious passions ... without diminishing ... such as are virtuous. They are . .. applicable to all our
affections. In vain do we hope to direct their influence only to
one side."36
That hope is vain. But Hume had another: that more of what
is bad depends upon false belief. This is also my hope.
All Souls College,O xford
35 The unity of a nation we seldom take for more than what it is. This is partly
because we often think of nations, not as units, but in a more complex way. If
we thought of ourselves in the way that I proposed, we might be less likely to
take our own identity for more than what it is. We are, for example, sometimes
told, "It is irrational to act against your own interests. After all, it will beyou
who will regret it." To this we could reply, "No, not me. Not even one of my
future selves. Just a descendant self."
36 "The Sceptic," in "Essays Moral, Political and Literary," Hume'sM oral
andP oliticalP hilosophy(N ew York, 1959), p. 349.
